

#Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership

by Martha Nussbaum


Chapter 2 
Disabilities and social contract

Needs for Care, Problems of Justice


pg 99
...

Impairment and disability raise two distinct problems of social justice here, both of them urgent. First, there is the issue of the fair treatment of people with impairments, many of whom need atypical social arrangements, including varieties of care, if they are to live fully integrated and productive lives. In another era, Sesha and Jamie probably would have died in infancy; if they had lived they would have been institutionalized with minimal custodial care, never getting a chance to develop their capacities for love, joy, and, in Jamie’s case, substantial cognitive achievement and, probably, active citizenship. Fifteen years ago, before Asperger’s syndrome was recognized as a disease, Arthur would have been treated as a smart kid whose parents had messed him up emotionally. He would probably have been institutionalized, with no opportunity to learn, and they would have lived with crushing guilt. 

A just society, by contrast, would not stigmatize these children and stunt their development; it would support their health, education, and full participation in social and even, when possible, political life.9 A just society, we might think, would also look at the other side of the problem, the burdens on people who provide care for dependents. These people need many things: recognition that what they are doing is work; assistance, both human and financial; opportunities for rewarding employment and for participation in social and political life. This issue is closely connected with issues of gender justice, since most care for dependents is provided by women. Moreover, much of the work of caring for a dependent is unpaid and is not recognized by the market as work. And yet it has a large effect on the rest of such a worker’s life. My sister could not hold any job that did not allow her long hours at home. That both the Bérubés and Kittays share their child-care responsibilities more equally than is typical among ambitious professionals is made possible only by the extremely flexible schedule of university teaching and writing. They also can afford a lot of help—most of it, as Kittay notes with unease, provided by women who are themselves not paid very highly and not respected by society, as they should be for performing an expert and vital social service. 

These problems cannot be ignored or postponed on the grounds that they affect only a small number of people. That would be a bad reason to postpone them anyway, given that they raise pressing issues of equality, just as it would be bad to postpone issues of racial or religious subordination on the ground that they affect only a small minority. But we should acknowledge, as well, that disability and dependency come in many forms. It is not only the wide range of children and adults with lifelong impairments who need extensive and even hourly care from others. The mental, physical, and social impairments that I have just described all have rough parallels in the conditions of the elderly, who are generally even more difficult to care for than children and young adults with disabilities, more angry, defensive, and embittered, less physically pleasant to be with. Washing the body of a child with Down syndrome seems vastly easier to contemplate than washing the incapacitated and incontinent body of a parent who hates being in such a condition, especially when both the washer and the washed remember the parent’s prime. So the way we think about the needs of children and adults with impairments and disabilities is not a special department of life, easily cordoned off from the “average case.” It also has implications for the way “normals” (people with average flaws and limitations)11 think about their parents as they age— and about the needs they themselves are likely to have if they live long enough.12 As the life span increases, the relative independence that many people sometimes enjoy looks more and more like a temporary condition, a phase of life that we move into gradually and all too quickly begin to leave. Even in our prime, many of us encounter shorter or longer periods of extreme dependency on others—after surgery or a severe injury, or during a period of depression or acute mental stress.13 Although a theoretical analysis may attempt to distinguish phases of a “normal” life from lifelong impairment, the distinction in real life is hard to draw, and is becoming harder all the time. 

But if we recognize the continuity between the situation of people with lifelong impairments and phases of “normal” lives, we must also recognize that the problem of respecting and including people with impairments, and the correlative problem of providing care for people with impairments and disabilities, are vast, affecting virtually every family in every society. There are a lot of people whose health, participation, and self-respect are at stake in the choices we make in this area. Meeting these needs in a way that protects the dignity of the recipients would seem to be one of the important jobs of a just society. 

At the same time, there is also a vast amount of care work being done, usually without pay and without public recognition that it is work. Arranging for such care in a way that does not exploit the caregiver would also seem to be a central job of a just society. At one time it used to be assumed that all this work would be done by people (specifically, women) who were not full citizens anyway and did not need to work outside the home. Women were not asked whether they would do this work: it was just theirs to do, and it was assumed that they did it by choice, out of love, even though they usually had few choices in the matter. Now we think that women are equal citizens and are entitled to pursue the full range of occupations. We also generally think that they are entitled to a real choice about whether they will do a disproportionate amount of child care or assume the burden of caring for an elderly parent. Nor would most people say, if asked, that the accident of giving birth to a child with severe impairments should blight all prospects, for the parents or one parent, of living a productive personal and social life. But the realities of life in nations that still assume (as to some extent all modern nations do) that this work will be done for free, “out of love,” still put enormous burdens on women across the entire economic spectrum, diminishing their productivity and their contribution to civic and political life.16 Ordinary child care is still disproportionately done by women, since women are far more likely than men to accept part-time work and the career detours it requires. Fathers who agree to help care for a child who will soon go off to school, moreover, are much less likely to shoulder the taxing long-term burden of care for an extremely impaired child or parent. In some nations, a woman who does such work usually can count on some support from an extended family or community network; in others, she cannot.
